[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>In 1909, the "Phoenix
Gazette" ran a cover-page story
about the Smithsonian
Institution
discovering caverns
in the Grand Canyon
that contained it Egyptian and
Hindu and Buddhist artifacts.
Also in these caverns
were discovered
swords and statues and
hundreds of mummies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Why did the people of the
Southwest mummify the dead?
Was the ancient Southwest
part of a vast trading
network that went down to
Mexico and, in fact, all
over the world?
What happened to these people?
Why did they abandon
these cities?
And where did they go?
These are some of the
questions that we'll
explore in this episode of "Lost
Cities and Ancient Mysteries."
The history of Arizona
and the American Southwest
is as much of a mystery today
as it was 100 years ago.
These ruins in northern
Arizona are called Wutpaki.
It's near the Grand Canyon.
And what we see here
is a ball court.
This is one of the most
northern ball courts
in all of the Americas.
But ball courts are found
in Mexico and Guatemala
as far south as
Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
And we find ball courts
here in northern Arizona
near to the Grand Canyon.
>>There is a ball court at
Wutpaki National Monument.
It's the farthest-north ball
court on the North American
continent.
And the Hopi had a huge
trade network with the Maya.
So the ball court
tradition stretches down
into the Maya territory
thousands of miles away.
And there was a
big trade network
between the Hopi and the Maya.
In fact, there have been found
many parrots and macaws buried
in northern Arizona, which
proves that the trade network
was very strong around 1100 AD.
gt;gt;archaeologists wonder
about the connections between
northern Arizona and
central Arizona with Mexico.
What contact did they have
with the Toltecs, the Aztecs,
and the Mayans?
Did some of the turquoise
and jade and metals
that the Aztecs and
Mayans and Toltecs use
come from the
American southwest?
Some of the answers
may be found here
at Wupatki and other areas
near the Grand Canyon.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There would seem to
be many connections
between the ancient Egyptians
and the original natives
of the American Southwest.
For one thing, they both
hunted with boomerangs.
They also mummified the dead.
Many of their religions
were similar, too,
in the sense of sun
worshipping and various gods.
Many people claim
today that there
are connections between
the Hopis and the Zunis
and many Oriental and Egyptian
cultures, including Japanese,
and the ancient Hindus
and Buddhists as well.
>>The Hopi Sipapuni is very
close to this reputed site
of the lost Egyptian
city in the Grand Canyon.
A lot of people claim
to know where it's at,
but it hasn't actually
been rediscovered.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There is a lot of
correspondences
between the Egyptians
and the Hopi culture.
There are a lot of
linguistic correspondences.
For instance, the
word for "star"
is "sohu" in the Hopi language,
and the word for the Orion
constellation is "Sahu."
So it's virtually
identical, those two words.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This Olmec statue out of
basalt is extremely unusual.
It looks very Egyptian to me.
And in fact, notice
that he's apparently
wearing the false
beard that we associate
so much with the pharaohs.
Other parts of his
head, too, seem
to be Egyptian-type pharonic
headdress that he's wearing.
>>Various Southwestern Indian
traditions place the Sipapu,
or the place of emergence--
most traditions place
it up in the San Luis
Valley near the base of the
sacred mountain of the East,
or Blanca Peak,
we call it today,
which is the White Mountain.
Or it's called the Sacred
Black Sash Medicine Belt.
And that Sipapu is
shared by the Rio Grande
offshoots of the Anasazi.
The Hopi are different.
And they place their
place of emergence
in the Little
Colorado River Gorge
near the Sacred Salt Mound.
And I find it very
intriguing that this is also
the location, the
supposed location, where
a cavern of probably the immense
value of Egyptian artifacts
was allegedly found and
cleaned out by the Smithsonian
over a matter of
months back in 1909.
And then the
Smithsonian has denied
that they ever were there, that
they had an explorer there.
I guess guy's name was Jordan.
So I find it very
interesting that there
should be a very close proximity
connection between the Hopis'
place of emergence and
this particular alleged
cavern of Egyptian artifacts
and the Little Colorado River
Gorge.
>>A lot of spiritual elders
believe that the Sipapuni ,
the place of emergence, was
somewhere in the Middle East.
They're not real sure
about exactly where.
It might have been in Egypt.
It might have been Jerusalem.
But there are tales that have
the Hopi coming from the Middle
East to the New World.
>>These ruins here
near the Grand Canyon
may have been part of the
network of trading citadels
and trading centers that had
to do with the early Chinese
and Egyptian, Hindu, and
Buddhist explorers that
were coming into the Southwest
and going to the Grand Canyon.
>>There is an artifact
that the Hopi use.
It's called a mongko.
And it's very similar to the
Waynman Dixon relics found
in the north shaft
of the Queen's
Chamber of the Great Pyramid.
So these two artifacts
are virtually identical,
and they both resemble
the constellation Taurus,
the V-shaped--
the bull's horns of Taurus.
>>Is it possible that
the area of Wupatki
was part of a center for a
necropolis in the Grand Canyon
that contained
hundreds of mummy,
as the "Gazette"
article in 1909 claimed?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As you Doctor through the
deserts of southern Arizona,
you start seeing these
billboards for The Thing.
What is The Thing?
Well, it turns
out that The Thing
has something to
do with our quest
for the Egyptian artifacts
in the Grand Canyon.
Let's find out what it is.
This is The Thing.
The Thing is a mummy
of a woman and a child.
And supposedly it is from
the Grand Canyon-Flagstaff
area of northern Arizona.
Is it possible that The Thing
is one of the mummies taken out
of the Egyptian treasure
vaults in the Grand Canyon?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So now we have seen that
The Thing is in fact
a mummy and a child from the
Flagstaff and Grand Canyon
area.
Is it possible that
these artifacts
are from the Egyptian
caves in the Grand Canyon,
mentioned in the 1909
"Phoenix Gazette" article?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the Little
Colorado River Gorge.
It was here that the
Mormon pioneer Seth
Tanner would prospect.
He would come up from Cameron
in the Navajo Nation area
and move up through the Little
Colorado River and its gorge,
prospecting, looking for
gold, panning in the river.
As he went farther west,
he came to the junction
of the Little Colorado River
Gorge and the Grand Canyon.
There at the junction of
the Little Colorado River
Gorge and the Grand Canyon are
the sacred Hopi salt mines.
Today, this area is reserved
only for the Hopi Indians,
and tourists are not allowed
to go into this area.
But this is the area that
the mysterious Seth Tanner
was exploring when he discovered
a secret cave of the Hopis.
Inside this cave were objects,
possibly statues, artifacts,
and mummies, that the Hopis
didn't want anyone to see.
But Seth Tanner saw these things
inside this secret cavern.
Because Seth Tanner had seen
what was inside the sacred Hopi
caverns, they blinded
him and kept him captive
in a cave for many years.
A photo still exists of Seth
Tanner as a blinded old man.
But what he saw in those
caves has never been divulged
and is still a secret today.
>>The area where this cavern
system is said to exist
is right before the river.
I think the river curves
around from the North Rim,
curves around, and
then does a jog back
to the south down towards
the main body of the canyon.
It's in that area that, at least
from my research that I've--
that's where I would
suspect that it would be.
And it's very inaccessible.
It's extremely hard to get to.
There's quite a number
of good websites
that actually people have
taken expeditions and mounted
expeditions and
gone to this area.
It takes several days to
get to if you're hiking.
But it is on the eastern
side of the canyon
on the north side of the river.
>>I think the
desolation of the area
has prevented any hard
finding of this, rediscovery
of this place, because it
is a very dangerous place
to go hiking.
Experienced hikers
have been swept away
to their deaths and their
bodies never found in this area.
So it's a real hard place to
be to make your way around.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Hopi Indians have a number
of prophecies concerning
the end of the fourth world,
the end of today's world
as we know it.
One of these prophecies
claims that spiderwebs
will run across their land.
And we can see that today
with the power lines that
are running all across the Hopi
Indian reservation and Navajo
Indian reservation here
in Northeast Arizona.
>>Two of these cycles have
occurred in this current world
that we're in.
The Maya, similar to the Hopi
and other Southwestern Indians,
have a tradition that we are in
the end of a cycle of worlds.
According to the Hopi, the world
was destroyed by fire, by ice,
and we're at the end of
the fourth world right now.
I think fire, wind and ice.
And this particular world,
according to the Hopi,
is going to be destroyed
by the earth shaking.
The Warrior Twins
are in the ground
right now, holding
Paluliikon, who
is the primordial serpent that
keeps the world in balance.
And because the
people have decided
to turn their back on tradition,
on ceremony, the Warrior Twins
are going to abdicate
responsibility
for keeping
Paluliikon, in check,
and they're going to let go.
He will spasm four
times, and the Earth
will flip over four times.
That is the Hopi version.
Now, the Maya have a very
similar interpretation
of this particular time cycle.
And two of these calendars
have clicked over
like this in the
last 3,200 years.
And whenever this particular
conjunction or turning over,
clicking over from one
cycle to another occurs,
there are cataclysmic changes
that occur in the world.
And so that is where the
interpretation that the world
is going to end in the pop
culture version has come from,
because the two cycles prior
to this that this has happened,
there has been
cataclysmic change.
There appears to be a connection
between Hopi end-of-the-world,
shall we say, or end-of-cycle
myths and the Mayan
end-of-cycle myths.
Martin Gashweseoma, who is
the last traditional elder,
considered the last
traditional Hopi elder--
there are some who
are not well known,
but Martin is the most well
known of these traditionals.
He has a very interesting,
folded-up Mayan codices,
or it's a piece of paper.
It's pretty long.
It's about 4 or 5 feet long.
It has a series of
Mayan glyphs on it.
And he says that this Mayan
glyph is the pictorialization
of the Hopi prophecy.
And he sat down on
several occasions
and explained the progression.
And you see that
humans at the beginning
have roots going out of their
backsides into the ground
when they're sitting on the
ground or out of their feet
into the ground when
they're on their feet.
And as time progresses,
the roots get smaller.
And we are now at a time where
actually not only do we not
have roots that tie
us to Mother Earth,
but we're actually
floating above the Earth.
And we're at the
last two figures
and glyphs on this
long strip that he has,
where sergeant-at-arms is
standing behind mankind
with a club and is
about ready to clock us
on the head with this
club and punish us.
And he equates this with the
return of True White Brother,
who has the last missing tablet
that the Hopi are waiting
to have returned to Hopi land.
Now, there's a similar
version in the Mayan
prophecy of the cycles ending
at this particular time period.
And the Hopis have been waiting
for the fulfillment of a number
of prophecies that have been
foretold for 1,000-plus years,
probably thousands of years.
And they are contained
on a series of tablets
that Grandfather Martin
was a custodian of.
They're called the Fire
Clan Prophecy Tablets.
He observed one of the last
prophecies being fulfilled
in 1989 when during a snowstorm
the sacred purple flower
of the Hopi came up through
a snowbank and blossomed.
And then at the same time
during the same storm,
this pear tree bloomed
outside of his house.
And he took this as fulfillment
of this very important
prophecy.
He immediately went and
called Governor Bruce King
of New Mexico and arranged
a press conference
in Santa Fe for
reporters and brought
out the prophecy tablets
and really got in trouble
back on the res for doing this.
In fact, they stripped him
of the tablets eventually.
But he warned the world,
and he said that when
the War of the Gourd
of Ashes, which
is the major
conflict that's going
to occur at the end of this
world before True White Brother
comes back and lops
off a bunch of heads--
but this conflict,
he warned, was
going to start within the year.
And interestingly enough, I
think 9 or 10 months later
is when we invaded--
or kicked Saddam Hussein out
of Kuwait for invading Kuwait.
And he said that
that was the start
of this final
conflagration that's going
to be the end of this world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The Hopi Indians
originally inhabited
all of this area around
the Grand Canyon.
But about 700 years ago,
they abandoned these cities
and moved to the three Hopi
mesas that they occupy today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we have seen
that there really
is some kind of a mystery
in the Grand Canyon.
We've seen that there are ball
courts in Northern Arizona.
We have seen that a man named
Seth Tanner was punished
for finding a secret, hidden
place within the Grand Canyon.
We've also seen some of the
mummies that have apparently
come out of the Grand Canyon.
Our quest for lost cities and
ancient mysteries continues.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The area between the Salt
River and the Gila River
was once a huge area
of the Hohokam Indians,
who built cement-lined canals
and irrigated the desert
for miles all around.
They built large, multi-story
buildings out of concrete.
And they had ball courts,
just like in Mexico
and north at Wupatki ruins
near the Grand Canyon.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Did the Hohokam people
have a trading network
that went as far
north as the Grand
Canyon in Utah and Colorado?
Were they part of
a worldwide sun
kingdom network that was
centered on ancient Egypt?
Can it be that the ruins
here at Casa Grande,
made out of concrete,
have something
to do with the Egyptian
presence in the Grand Canyon?
The most popular game through
all of the North and Central
America was the
ball game, played
on ball courts like this one
here at Casa Grande in Central
Arizona.
Ball courts were
used by the Mayans
in the Toltecs and the
Aztecs and by the Hohokams
and other peoples
here in Arizona.
It was a game similar to
soccer and basketball.
Down in Mexico, the
game was typically
played with a rubber ball,
taken from the rubber plants
around the jungles
of Central America.
These rubber balls were then
brought up from Mexico here
into Central Arizona,
along with exotic feathers
and other jungle items such
as cocoa seeds and crystals,
other things like that.
Curiously, too, here
in Arizona the natives
hunted with boomerangs.
Even though we
think of boomerangs
as an Australian
aboriginal weapon,
boomerangs were used
all over the world.
And it's well known
that the Egyptians
hunted with boomerangs,
as did American Indians.
And people in Europe I hunted
with boomerangs as well.
Some of the oldest boomerangs
that have ever been discovered
were found in Poland and in
Denmark, as well as in Florida.
In the Valley of
Kings near Luxor,
Egypt, is something similar
to the Grand Canyon--
ancient vaults cut into
solid rock and, inside them,
the mummies of kings and
other important people.
Is it possible that what
the 1909 "Phoenix Gazette"
story was talking about of
Egyptians in the Grand Canyon
is something similar to what
is found at the Valley of Kings
in Luxor in Southern Egypt?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We saw the megalithic
engineering in Egypt in Peru.
But here in Arizona, they build
their cities out of concrete,
much as we would do today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the ancient
site of Tuzigoot
near Cottonwood, Arizona.
Like the Hohokam
cities, it, too,
is built out of a kind
of a concrete or cement.
Tuzigoot is build by the
Sinagua people, the people
without water, a people who
we don't know who they were.
They disappeared.
But we believe that they
were related to the Hohokam
and also to the Hopis
of Northern Arizona.
One of the reasons that
Tuzigoot might have been here
is that nearby in Jerome,
Arizona, on a mountain
is the ancient mines
used by the Aztecs
that were then
rediscovered in the 1800s
and then mined as the
modern Jerome copper mines.
In fact, the ancient Hopi trail
coming from the Hopi mesas
came down into this
area right here
to Tuzigoot and to
the Blue Mountain,
where Jerome sits today.
So here we have evidence of
ancient mining by the Hohokam
and of the same kind
of building techniques.
So it seems possible that
the Hohokam had spread
far into Northern Arizona,
bringing their ball courts
and other technology, such
as concrete, with them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[DRUMMING]
This is the famous metropolitan
center of Teotihuacan,
about an hour north
of Mexico City.
It's famous for its giant
pyramid of the sun and giant
pyramid of the moon.
It also has a pyramid
of Quetzalcoatl.
No one knows who built
this giant pyramid complex.
It was thought by the Aztecs
to have been built by giants
at the beginning of the Earth.
Today, archaeologists think
that possibly this entire area
was huge hydrological
work and all
of the plazas
around the pyramids
were flooded with water.
It's possible that Teotihuacan,
much like Tiwanaku in Bolivia,
was a huge metallurgical area,
washing oars out and making
iron and copper and
other metals for use
by the Olmecs and the Toltecs.
Behind me is the Pyramid of
the Sun here at Teotihuacan.
It's the third
largest known pyramid
in the world after the
Great Pyramid at Giza
and the Great
Pyramid at Cholula,
which is also here in Mexico.
The pyramid measures 220 meters
on each side of the base,
and it is currently
70 meters high.
It's not really known who
built Teotihuacan or really
how old it is.
Many archaeologists
believe that Teotihuacan
was built around 100 AD,
although there is evidence
that these pyramids are
much older than that
and were built as far
away as 1000 or 1500 BC.
The Great Pyramid of
the Sun at Teotihuacan
was actually built
over a natural cave.
And this cave was in
a cloverleaf shape.
And some archaeologists believe
that a natural spring emanated
out of this cave
and water flowed out
of the Great Pyramid of the
Sun and into the streets
of Teotihuacan.
In this theory, Teotihuacan
was a water city,
and water was all over the city.
And instead of walking
between the pyramids,
a visitor would have to go from
building to building in a boat.
One reason why
Teotihuacan might have
been a giant hydrological
works was that this
was an ore processing area.
Water was diverted
into certain areas
or was washed by the water.
And then copper and silver
and gold and other metals
were extracted from the
ore here at Teotihuacan.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The pyramids here at
Teotihuacan are huge,
nearly the size of some
of the pyramids in Egypt.
However, the pyramids
in Egypt are megalithic.
They're built out
of giant blocks
of granite and limestone.
Here at Teotihuacan,
the pyramids are large,
but they're built out of smaller
stones, something a little bit
more easy than to
accomplish, really.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the Great
Pyramid of Cholula.
It's the largest structure
in all of Mexico.
This pyramid was only
discovered in 1910,
when they were building
an insane asylum here.
Up until that time, they thought
that this giant pyramid was
just a hill covered with dirt.
In fact.
They built a church
on top of it.
But today, we know that the
Great Pyramid of Cholula
is the largest pyramid in Mexico
and the second largest pyramid
in the world after the
Great Pyramid of Egypt.
This pyramid is dedicated
to Quetzalcoatl.
And in fact, exactly
how this pyramid came
to be covered completely
in dirt to look like a hill
is still a mystery.
One of the explanations
is that this pyramid was
so sacred to the
ancient Mexicans
that when the
Spanish invaded, they
didn't want this
pyramid destroyed,
and so in a few weeks, they
went through tremendous effort
to bury the pyramid.
We can see from this
section of the pyramid
where Mexican archaeologists
have restored it,
we get a good idea of what
the pyramid originally looked
like when it was being used.
And in fact, it not only
was gigantically huge,
but beautifully
spectacular as well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the things about the
Great Pyramid here of Cholula
is that archaeologists say
that it was constructed
over an ancient spring
and that water poured out
of the pyramid.
This is also what
we are theorizing
happened with the pyramids at
Teotihuacan, that water also
was coming out of the pyramid
and flooding that ancient city.
So follow me as we go deep
inside the Great Pyramid
of Cholula.
Mexican archaeologists
have actually
cut these tunnels
inside of the pyramid
so that they could
go deep into the core
and see if there were any
tombs or natural caverns.
They wanted to see how the
pyramid was constructed.
And as we get
deeper inside, we'll
see many side passages, some
going up, some going down.
And even we'll find some
of the earlier inner layers
of the pyramid when it
was first constructed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Mankind has never moved
as much material and mass
is what's over us right now.
We're deep inside
the Great Pyramid
of Cholula, one of the largest
edifices ever constructed
in the world.
We're deep inside the Great
Pyramid of Cholula here.
And in fact, this is a
crossroads of the tunnels.
One of the tunnels is going
deep down inside the pyramid.
This is probably to
the natural cave,
where there was originally a
spring and water came out of.
And this tunnel is going
up towards the top.
Must be going
nearer to the apex.
You can see some of
the outer levels that
were part of the
original pyramid that
was here before other pyramids
were constructed over it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the early 1940s, University
of California archaeologist
Matthew Stirling discovered
five colossal heads
made out of basalt at La Venta.
The largest of these
heads weighs over 24 tons
and was taken from a quarry
over 100 kilometers away.
It's assumed by
modern archaeologists
that the Olmecs did not
know the use of the wheel.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Year after year, archaeologists
discover new things
about the Olmecs, pushing
them farther back in time
and deeper into the
heart of Mexico.
Only recently
archaeologists have
discovered the oldest writing
in the Americas, which is Olmec.
Also they've discovered Olmec
remains near Mexico City.
Notice here again how his
hands are on his knees.
This is known as the
[INAUDIBLE] position.
He's wearing an unusual
headdress with a ball in front.
It's possible that there
was a snake here, too.
This also would have
been very Egyptian.
His headdress as well
is very Egyptian.
It's a very fine and
well-made statue.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're on the Great Pyramid
of the ancient city
of Tula, the Toltec capital.
These giant statues are
called at Atlanteans,
and they're actually
pillars that
once held the roof of a
great temple dedicated
to Quetzalcoatl.
Tula is about 60 miles
north of Mexico City,
and it's one of the forest-north
megalithic cities in Mexico.
The other Toltec
capital was Chichen Itza
in the eastern Yucatan.
The Toltecs themselves
are a mysterious group,
arriving sometime around
the time of Christ
and then taking over much
of Mexico from the Yucatan
to even this area
north of Mexico City.
Who were the Toltecs
and where did they go?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So who were the Toltecs?
According to some
archaeologists,
the Toltecs are the
remains of the Phoenicians
and Carthaginians.
After the Punic Wars between
Rome and Carthage and with Rome
finally conquering
the Carthaginians,
salting the earth at
Carthage and controlling
the Mediterranean, the Toltecs,
who were also the Carthaginians
and Phoenicians, escaped
across the Atlantic
and came to their trading
bases in the Yucatan in Mexico.
Here, they created Tula, the
new Toltec Phoenician capital
north of Mexico City.
It's thought from here
they also expanded
into northern Mexico,
Texas, Arizona,
New Mexico, and other areas.
We find ball courts
here at Tula,
just like we do in Arizona.
Is it possible that the
Toltecs have something
to do with the mysteries
of the Grand Canyon
and some of the mummies
and Egyptian artifacts
that were discovered there
at the turn of the century?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This Atlantean
statue here at Tula
is holding in his
right hand kind
of an unusual and
mysterious artifact.
Mainstream
archaeologists think it's
an atlatl, a spear thrower.
But the writer and Sumerian
archaeologist Sitchen
thinks this was a plasma gun,
a kind of rock-melting device
for mining.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the central
plaza of Tula,
the ancient Toltec capital
dedicated to Quetzalcoatl.
We can see here the central
plaza, and over on that side
is one of the
Toltec ball courts.
It's thought that the ball
game, using a rubber ball,
originated with the
Olmecs in Southern Mexico.
The Mayas used the ball game.
So did the Toltecs.
But ball courts like this
are found as far north
as the Grand Canyon
in northern Arizona.
We know that the Hohokam Indians
and others played the same ball
game as the Toltecs.
Is it possible that the Toltec
civilization expanded as far
north as Utah and Colorado
and the ball game being played
in all of these areas, just
like the Toltecs here north
of Mexico City?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The founder of Tula
was said to have
been a light-skinned
man with a dark beard,
and he founded Tula
as a peaceful society.
But later, another
group took over Tula,
and they worshipped a dark
god and introduced again
human sacrifice that
Quetzalcoatl had forbidden.
This ruler then departed
Tula and went to the east,
promising that he
would return one day
and retake this ancient city.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When Cortez landed
at Vera Cruz, he
was seemingly fulfilling
this ancient Toltec prophecy
of the return of their king.
Cortez was a light-skinned
man with a dark beard,
and the Aztecs thought that
he was the returning god
Quetzalcoatl.
It was the seemingly fulfilling
of this prophecy that
caused the downfall
of the Aztecs
and the ascent of the
Spanish here in Mexico.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is one of the
Toltec ball courts, where
they played a game that was
kind of a cross between soccer
and basketball.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Behind me here is the mysterious
conical pyramid of Cuicuilco.
It's thought to be one of the
oldest pyramids or structures
in the valley of Mexico.
archaeologists often date this
as at least 2,000 years old.
However, it is covered
partially by a lava flow.
And back in the
1920s, geologists
speculated that this lava
flow was over 8,000 years old.
Since the pyramid had to be
built before it was covered
by a lava flow,
this would indicate
that this pyramid is not 2,000
years old, but over 8,000 years
old.
archaeologists do not know who
to ascribe this ancient pyramid
to.
It's actually so old
that it may actually
have been built by the Olmecs.
Recent excavations
here in Central Mexico
have revealed that
the Olmecs were indeed
in the area of Mexico City
and in the area of Cuicuilco.
is it possible that the ancient
Olmecs built this pyramid?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The history of Mexico
and Central America
is as much of an enigma today
as it was to archaeologists
100 years ago.
Civilizations rose and fell.
But modern archaeologists
are reluctant to admit
the long-distant connections
of the Aztecs and the Maya,
of the Toltecs and the Olmecs.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We've seen the megalithic
monuments of the Olmecs,
but we don't know who
these people were,
where they came from, or
what happened to them.
Yet our search for lost
cities and ancient mysteries
will continue.
[MUSIC PLAYING]